I watch my own tracks constantly. They go like a dog
with a curious nose always catching scent of something
unidentifiable hovering just out of reach. If I go to
the store for milk, my trail winds a quarter of a mile to
go a block and a half. Even in a small New Jersey
town, the landscape is as full of invisible animals as a
child ’ s puzzle.

One winter after a moderate snow, I went out to get
milk and found the track of a small gray bird called a
Junco. I like the silhouette of the Junco; its head rounds
so smoothly into its back that it looks like it ought to be
made out of chrome. Birds are always mysteries. They
leave their track in the air most of the time and I don ’ t
have the nose to follow it. Their tracks on the ground
were irresistible.

I crouched down and looked at them, judging the size
and shape of the prints to get the type of bird. I watched
its ease of movement on the ground and knew it wasn ’ t
a finch or a sparrow. The tracks went from seed to seed
in an easy zig-zagging line. Looking close I could see
where the bird had stopped and leaned a little to one
side, breaking down the side of its print while it ducked
and then craned its head up. I saw where it gave a little
defensive hop as something that seemed threatening
must have gone by overhead.

The movement from a hop to a better balanced stance
said there had been danger. The way the toes went into
the snow and curled under told me that more weight had
been forward on the foot, as it would have been if the bird
were ducking its head and then swiveling it to look up.

I had learned what track is made by that gesture the
only way it can be learned, by watching a similar bird do
a similar thing on the ground and then going over to see


Hie Utimate Track 3


what the track looked like. By doing this time after time
with bird after bird, animal after animal, person after
person, I became a tracker.

Since I began tracking at the age of eight, I have never
seen a track being made without wanting to go over and
examine it. With each track I add a little information to
what I have been able to gather so far. Bit by bit, I learn
to track more completely the mystery at the end of every
track.

The tracks painted in the living picture of a bird, a
picture indistinct at first but clearer with every track,
until I could see the small, sleek, gray head swiveling,
swiveling as he picked up the seed and looked for cats,
dogs, children, cars, birds after his prize, and bigger,
hungrier things looking for an easy meal. His tracks
hopped forward and I could see, as I crouched, the
brushings of his wings in the snow as he took off. He
was gone from the ground, but I could still see him in
my mind, darting through the air. I looked in a straight
line for the most prominent tree and walked toward it.

Juncoes do not waste time cruising for bugs or
soaring around sightseeing. They live the pragmatic life
of the straight line. They go right down into the jaws of
sudden death, down onto the ground, and live by their
wits and their prudence. Birds are a delicacy on almost
every predator ’ s menu, and when the Junco lands, he
hops around watching and watching, pecking and drop 
ping half of what he pecks at because his head comes
back up so fast to see what ’ s after him next.

I brushed the pecked and dropped seeds aside. With a
mouthful, he had gone flapping off toward the tree, and
when I got to it, there were seeds at the foot of the tree
that were like the ones where he had taken off, There
was a fresh dust of snow around the seeds and beneath
some of them, where he had knocked snow down off the
branch as he landed.

He must have felt safe sitting there ten feet above half
the things that would like to eat him. He must have
known that he was hard to see in the trees and that the
hawks would rather take him flying anyway. A fleeing


4 THE TRACKER


animal is a vulnerable animal, and every carnivore in the
forest likes an easy kill.

When he changed the position of the seeds in his
gullet, he dropped some of them down over the snow
that had fallen from the branch. There were hop marks
where he had come down to get the dropped seeds later,
but the fact that there was a fine dusting of snow on
some of the seeds indicated that he had probably come
to that branch before to swallow what he had grabbed
from the ground.

There were other hop marks under the snow dust
when I blew it away, and they seemed to have the same
jittery prudence that the other tracks had had. Of
course, I knew the bird, I had seen it around my own
feeder. Every species has its specific behaviors, but
every individual performs them differently. They ’ re as
unalike as people.
I recognized the jittery little tremors, the half steps
thought about but left untaken. I had gone out and
examined his other tracks after I had watched him one
day from my window. I could see him pecking and
ducking in that jittery, cocky style of feeding that was as
individual as a human gait. I checked how the lighter
dust of snow from his takeoff had scattered behind him.
I checked where it had fallen in relation to the other fall,
and I guessed that either the wind had been drifting in
that direction or the bird had taken off in the opposite
direction sending the branch back and down as it left
and dusting the snow further out than the first fall.

Since it was all I had to go on, I went as I had been
taught from the track to the trail, looking far ahead to
see where it might be going. I could read the identity
from the individual print, but I needed the context in
which the trail occurred to make sense of it entirely. The
bird was feeding, the branch fall indicated he had flown
in the direction of my house, and when I walked back
there, I found that same jittery Junco near my own
feeder. I sat down to watch him pecking-watchingpecking-watchingpeckingwatching-pecking-watching,
until someone finally came out of the house and asked
me where the milk was.


Hie Ultimate Track 5


I was fascinated with nature even before Stalking Wolf
taught me to track, but my nature-watching was limited
by the necessity of sitting and waiting for a long time in
a place where we hoped something might happen.
Stalking Wolf gave me the tools to track the mystery to
its source. He taught me how to teach myself. I have
been using the tools he gave me ever since.

Stalking Wolf was an Apache tracker. He had come
to New Jersey to be near his son who was stationed
there. His grandson, Rick, was my best friend, and
Stalking Wolf taught both of us how we could teach
ourselves to track, to stalk, to live in the woods, and to
survive there. He gave us the questions that would lead
us to our answers, but he never told us an answer. He
taught me to see and to hear, to walk and to remain
silent; he taught me how to be patient and resourceful,
how to know and how to understand. He taught me to
see invisible things from the trail that all action leaves
around itself. He taught me how to teach myself the
mystery of the track.

Since Stalking Wolf began teaching me, I have
worked every day of my life at learning more and more
about nature and about tracking. What I have learned
was not easily learned, but anyone willing to take the
time could do it. Most of the fundamental principles of
how to track are in this book and anyone can learn
them. Anyone willing to spend twenty years working
diligently at it can learn the minute nuances of it as well.
Stalking Wolf thought I had a gift for tracking. Anyone
with a greater gift could probably learn the nuances in
less time. After twenty years, I am still finding things in
tracks that I have never seen before, and I do not believe
I am in any danger of running out of discoveries.

School taught me how to read. Stalking Wolf taught
me how to learn. I have been learning something every
minute since, and there is no better way to unravel the
mystery than to watch it move. But mysteries are by
nature shy and secretive, and most often, the closest you
get to them is the traces left behind by movement and


6 THETRACKER


the disturbances left by action. I could not see the bird,
but I could see the actions of the bird in the traces he left
and in the disturbances made by his actions. I could see
what was out of place since he had come and gone, the
seeds where they did not grow, the tracks in the snow,
the snow itself dusted down where it would not have
been naturally. I could see the bird go through his
routine almost as surely as if I had stood there watching
him.

But a track is a temporary thing. Unless the mud goes
suddenly hard and turns gradually to stone, tracks do
not last. They fade, and as they dry, the wind sweeps
them relentlessly level to ease its way across the ground.
Tracks exist at the interface where the sky drags along
the surface of the earth. They exist for a relatively brief
time in a narrow level near the surface of the ground
where the wind and the weather move across, changing
the temperature and building information into the
track. Wind pushes the tracks flat; rain tries to wash
them away. Nature conspires to steal even the traces of
passage. Most tracks made in the world go under un 
seen. I try to follow every one I can.

Each trail is one of a kind. The same combination of
weather, land, temperature, and creature are probably
duplicated no more often than snowflakes. The same in 
teractions between so many variables probably never
recur. Even within the easily identified, habitual gait of
a person there are nuances made by the changing flux of
emotions as he or she moved. The sheer variety of tracks
is astounding; the amount that can be learned from
than is irresistible.

Either by gift or by curse, I have a compulsion to
know more about nature. I can never get enough.
Everything I learn makes me see how much more there
is to know and how little time there is in a lifetime to
learn it all. Stalking Wolf gave me the tools I needed to
pursue my curiosity, and I have been sharpening those
tools ever since.

The vision of the world given me by Stalking Wolf
has become a window into time. The more tracks I see,
the clearer the picture of the animal becomes until I can


The Ultimate Track 7


see him moving as he moved a minute, an hour, a month
before I came along. When the tracks stop, I can still see
the animal, how it paused, how it rested its body, where
it put its paws. The animal is there before me almost
real enough to touch, fixed in time by the impression of
its track. I see from the track the motion of his feet, the
motion of his body; I see the animal itself laying down
the mystery of its coming and going.

Nothing makes this picture more vivid to me than a
skull. When Rick and I found a skull, it kept us busy for
days. We cleaned it, assembled it, drew it, and sketched
the animal in around it. When we found a complete
skeleton, scattered as it often was over hundreds of
yards by the wild dogs, we were busy for weeks. Short
of the animal itself making the tracks, nothing pleased
us more than a skull.


A skull is the ultimate track a creature leaves. When
everything else has been unshaped by time, when every
scratch and print is gone, the skull remains. When I find
a skull, it ’ s as if I am standing within touch of the
second greatest mystery in the universe, the mystery of
where creatures go when they leave this greatest .mystery
of all, the pattern of life living itself, the visible design
of the invisible that we call Nature.

The place where you lose the trail is not necessarily
the place where it ends. A lost trail always extends
beyond the evidence, and even the trails we find are only
fragments of the trails that lie beyond our com 
prehension. When the bird left my feeder and flew, I
could trail him only by inference, but-his trail went on
after I lost it, and I believe it goes beyond the skull as
well, although I have no idea what it is like or how to
follow it. Skulls simply mark the pomt of departure and
the direction of flight, like the brush of a bird ’ s wing in
the snow.

I found my first skull in a swamp a mile or so from
my house in Beachwood, right off the Toms River, in a
place that is a marina and a parking lot now. It was only
a pile of broken bones when I found it, but I took it
home and fit the pieces together until I had the answer
to what it was.


8 THETRACKER


But every answer brings with it the inevitable
question: What has this thing got to do with everything
else? There is only one answer to that question but you
have to find it out for yourself a little at a time oyer a lot
of years. The question of what the bones made led me to
the question of what kind of skull it was, and the answer
to that question led to the question of how the animal
had lived and where he fitted into the larger pattern of
Hfe.

I am still following the trail of questions that I picked
up when I made that little pile of bones into a skull. This
book is the story of that trail as I have come down it so
far. It begins when I was seven. The pine trees came all
the way down to the river then. The houses in even the
most settled part of the Pine Barrens were few and far
between. Outside Toms River they were scattered in little clumps or strung out at erratic intervals along roads
made of hardpacked sand and gravel. There were not
enough people in the entire Pine Barrens to make a
decent size city. From Asbury Park to Trenton, from
Camden to Cape May, larger than Grand Canyon
National Park, stretched a wilderness of pitch pine and
underbrush cut by an endless tangle of sand roads
without names or numbers.

Along the roads, a few hundred native Pineys went
back and forth between villages like Hog Wallow and
New Egypt in old cars and trucks dying slowly from the
assaults of foot-high bumps and axle-deep potholes. But
they rarely got out of their cars. A hundred yards off
any sand road, there is probably still a place where no
human being has stood in a century.

But it ’ s dangerous to go and look. The road sinks half
a foot below the brush that packs the space between
thirty foot pines, and a traveler who goes ten yards into
the woods cannot look back and find the road again.
About twice a year someone wanders into the Pine
Barrens and dies trying to find their way out. Even the
Pineys, whose families have lived in the Pine Barrens
for more generations than any of them can remember,
stick to the roads.

I always went across the roads, following deer runs,


The Ultimate Track 9


making my own trails, running down any track I found.
I have loved the woods as long as I can remember, and I
have lived in them all my life. We lived in the fringes of
the forest, just off the river, but my back door opened
onto the wilderness. To me it was only my back yard. If
my parents asked me where I was going, I always told
them, “ Just camping in the back yard. ” I meant it and
it was true. But to me that back yard fanned out for
hundreds and hundreds of square miles. I had to wander
the Grand Tetons and go to California before I found
the back fence.

I rarely told my parents what went on in the woods,
and much of this book will probably come as a surprise
to them; but I knew how much they worried about me,
and I was afraid that any adventure I told them about
might have frightened them into keeping me closer to
home. Some of the things that happened to me would
certainly have cost me my freedom if I had mentioned
them, so I said nothing. The woods were my life and
still are. I could not risk losing them. There were trails
to follow there, and mysteries to be tracked down. Some
callings cannot be ignored.

At first, I had only my curiosity and my Golden Book
of Nature to guide me, but all that changed one day
when I was walking along the river a short way down
from my house. I was waking along the bank looking

for fossils when I ran into a small but muscular, dark 
haired boy doing the same thing. As far as I knew, I was
the only one in New Jersey who had even the least in 
terest in fossils or knew enough to go along the river
bank looking for them.

I asked him what he was doing, and he said,
“ Looking for fossils. ” My heart started pounding.
Finally, I had somebody to talk to! Somebody who
could understand what I was saying and cared about it.
We sat down on a log at the edge of the river around
eight o ’ clock in the morning and began to talk about
nature. By noon, we were colleagues, by three we were
friends. Eventually, we were to become brothers.

There were places where our skills and knowledge
overlapped, but more often than not, they com

10 THE TRACKER


plemented each other. Rick, small, muscular, slim, was
a better runner and a better stalker than I was. He had a
knack for stalking, and he moved far more quietly than
I did, even allowing for the difference in size. But I had
a passion for tracking, and I was better at that. There
was rarely any competition between us, and we were in 
separable during the whole period of my training by his
grandfather. ~

After we had talked through half the afternoon, Rick
took me home with him to meet the man who would be
my teacher and guide for the next nine years. I was in
awe of Stalking Wolf from the beginning. He was of
medium height and lean, like his grandson Rick, but his
features were classically Indian. There were centuries of
dead civilization in his face, and his eyes seemed to be
looking at things very far away that distracted him. He
seemed to be watching some complex totality that ab 
sorbed most of his attention.

It was years before I realized how far his perceptions
extended, how much he saw in a glance, how much he
heard, how incredibly much he knew. But it was clear
from the instant I first met him that he knew more of
what was worth knowing than anyone I would ever
meet. Rick idolized him, and the longer I knew Stalking
Wolf, the more I understood why.

Stalking Wolf was very old, and he drifted into
reveries that made him seem as if he might be senile
when I first met him. But I realized later, when I had
seen with amazement how keen his senses were, that he
had simply gone inside of himself for a moment to
check his perceptions against the pattern of the world.
Only after he had taught me how to be silent did I
realize that he was stopping his own motion so he could
tell the disturbances around him from his own.

It is a silence out of which the tracker listens for the
scolding of birds deeper in the woods, or the sound that
crackles the branches against the rustle of the wind.
Only by silence and rapt attention can anyone hope to
feel the ripples in the flow of life in the woods, which
spread outward from an intrusion or a disturbance. The


The Ultimate Track 11


scolding of a jay will put every bird within earshot on
edge.

Birds are the lookouts of the woods; they spread local
alarms. You can hear their cries going back and forth
through the air like emergency calls. A man going
through the woods churns up as much noise as he
churns up landscape. AU you have to do to hear it is be
quiet and listen. Stalking Wolfs silences were the mark
of his skill, the habit of a long practiced art. He was the
grandson of a medicine man, and a tracker and hunter
for his tribe. To Rick and me, he was the Spirit of the
Woods. I believe that he trained us the way he himself
had been trained as a child in the last years of the
nineteenth century. He taught us a way of life which
Rick and I tried to Uve by.

He was like an uncle who helps with the training of
his brother ’ s sons, aloof but affectionate, judgmental
but secretly amused, gentle and harsh, guiding without
directing. What he taught us permeated everything we
did. He taught us to look for subtleties, for nuances,
and we had to be quick to catch his hints.

I asked him once why he was so stiU at times, and he
said, “ To see better. ” I may have looked puzzled, but I
didn ’ t say anything because neither Rick nor I wanted
Stalking Wolf to think we were stupid. Besides, we
knew he would never give us the answer to anything
directly. Usually, we said we understood and then went
away and figured it out between ourselves. Then we
went back to Stalking Wolf and told him what we had
done and what had been the results. Stalking Wolf
would either give his approval of what we had done or
he would tell us we hadn ’ t looked, or hadn ’ t been as
quiet as we thought we had.

Then he would give us a hint about what we should do
to do whatever we did better, until we finally figured out
a way that was workable for us. Without his guidance,
we might have learned part of what we did learn, but it
would have taken us ten times as long, and some of it we
would never have gotten at all. He gave us information
that would lead us on to the next step a bit at a time, and


12 THE TRACKER


he always waited until we had incorporated what we had
learned before he nudged us toward something else.

Stalking Wolf led us out of childhood into a unique
kind of manhood. We came to our skills as he had come
to his, through a series of ideas and understandings that
could only be gotten out of experience. He taught us to
make use of everything, to live with the least disruption
of the earth, to revere what we took from the woods, to
master our fear, to hone our special skills sharper and
sharper, to expand our senses and our awareness, to live
in the space of the moment and to understand eternity.