I returned to the place where the raccoon had beenkilled. The words, 'Go back!' echoing in my mind. I was still angry. I took my knife from my sheath and finding a charred stick, began to whittle away at the charcoal.
My whittling worked into an intense hacking. My breathing becamelabored as I vented my frustration. Words without meaning racedthrough my troubled mind: 'Why? How? It isn t fair! Why …why … why?'
I screamed at the wind, 'Go back, hell!'

I began to cry and fell forward on my face in the ashesand sobbed. My knife was still in my hand. In my anger I began to

Raccoon Encounter/35

stab at the ashes. 'Go back,' I said and I cut at the black ash. 'Go

back! Go back!' And with each thought, I cut more deeply intothe black ash until I was slashing like some mad animal, trying to

hurt the earth. Or kill it.

Instead, my slashing uncovered the shoots of plant lifethat had not yet broken through the ash. There it was life growing out of death. Go back? I decided that I hadn t gone back far enoughand decided to backtrack the raccoon.
Its tracks, faint now at best

and very difficult to follow, led directly into the forest and up a knoll through dense thicket. The sky had darkened, and I knew I must hurry or lose the tracks to the rain.
Fortunately, I didn thave far to go before I discovered the raccoon s den, because it started raining. There on the other side of the knoll was a holedug under a clump of reeds.
There were no fresh tracks of any animals about the opening, and I assumed it was empty. Nevertheless, I approached it cautiously on my belly and peered into it, listening intently and straining my eyes to see if there was anything alive there.
I thought I heard a faint, high-pitched sound much like a kitten s mew, but I couldn t be sure. It was raining rather hard, and the wind was blowing. Anything could be in there, I thought, from a rabbit to a snake.
But I had a strong suspicion that it was neither of those, but rather a baby raccoon or two. If that was the case, I would probably get a nasty bite if I stuck my hand in there. I reached for a stick and poked it gently into the hole.
The stick was not attacked, but it did nudge against somethingsoft. There was some kind of animal in there, but its lack of movement made me think that it might very possibly be dead.
I waited for some time, debating how I would get whatever it was in there out, and finally decided to grit my teethand reach for it. I reached in and grabbed a handful of fur and pulled it out. There in my hand was a baby raccoon, dead.
I was shocked and thought I d cry again until I remembered that raccoons give birth to more than one baby. I reached again and again, and each time I pulled out a dead baby raccoon. This was all I could take, but I was too drained to cry.
I just rested my headin my arms and listened to the rain fall angrily. I felt hollow. Yet somewhere deep within me, there was

36/Tests and Encounters

a sound a wordless sound echoing, searching for a way out, to be released. I couldn t hear it, but I sensed its presence. A high-pitched whimpering. A weak, monosyllabic sound like the

mew of the kitten.

I lifted my head and listened intently against the windand the rain. I heard it again and forced my arm and hand to move toward the hole that had offered up nothing but death.
I plunged my arm in and grabbed wildly at a little ball of fur, knowing that it would not be alive. But it was it was weak and almostdead from hunger, but it was breathing.
Thank God, I thought and held it close to my chest, sheltering it from the rain. 'You re alive,' I said. 'Alive! Alive!' And I screamed into the wind, 'It s alive!'

I hurriedly pushed the dead baby raccoons back into the

den and shoved some mud and rocks into the den to cover them.

Then I made my way home to nurse the baby back to health. Some weeks later, I took my healthy pet to Stalking

Wolf s to show her off.

I had kept my adventure and little orphan a secret from my friend and teacher Stalking Wolf, because I didn t feel as though I had yet discovered the full meaning of his advice.
I do know that as I nursed the baby raccoon, the hurt and emptinessslowly subsided. Finally I was ready to share my discovery and on a fallafternoon, I picked up Little Orphan Annie, as I had come to call her, and walked over to Stalking Wolf s.

- What do you call her?' he asked, playing with her. She liked to roll on her back and have her belly rubbed.

- Little Orphan Annie!' I said without thinking. He looked at me and down at Annie and again at me, reading my mind, I thought, and said, 'I see. There is a word that
I use to celebrate life. It is 'Alive.' I will call Annie 'Alive,' because

she is no orphan, and because she seems so happy to be alive.' I didn t quite understand what Stalking Wolf meant and 1asked, 'What do you mean she is no orphan?'

- You are her father,' he said. 'And the earth is her

mother.'

- She is full of life, isn t she?' I remarked. '' Alive.' That s a

good name.' And I said it again, 'Alive.'

Raccoon Encounter/37

- She is about old enough to release,' Stalking Wolfadded as I was leaving. I didn t comment on it, but I knew it was

true. Alive was a wild animal and deserved the freedom of the

wild. However, I was not yet willing to give her up. I kept thinkingof her mother and the horrible death she must have experienced, and I vowed to protect Alive forever, if need be.
As the weeks wore on toward winter, Stalking Wolfswords preyed on my mind. I had taught her to hunt in the streamsand springs of the Barrens that summer. Showed her how to turnstones for crayfish and rotten logs for grubs.
Taught her how to climb trees and never to go into a clearing without a way to escape. We hunted and fished and played all summer. In the fall,
I taught her to climb the cornstalks for the ears of corn.
I laughedwhen she tumbled from the stalks too narrow to hold her weight. Alive was a good hunter and fisher and scavenger, and I knew she could fend for herself, but I wasn t convinced she could

stay alive with the dog packs that roamed the Barrens.

It was a difficult decision to make to release her to the

wild, but I finally decided to take her out to the place she had

been born and release her.

It was a difficult parting. I left her by a spring, hunting. There was no long talk or backward glances. No questioninglooks from my little animal friend. She was hunting, and I walked

away. It is not difficult to figure where I walked or what I thought about on the way. I remember talking about it to StalkingWolf and sharing my fears that she would not be able to survivethe winter and the dogs.
He warned me that I must not go back to where I had lefther. That I must trust her and the spirit that moves in all things to

work its will.
